Simplify, update, detail keyboard customization (#23)
Bastardkb/bastardkb.github.io: fw/compile-firmware.md

---
layout: default
title: Compiling your firmware
nav_order: 99
parent: Firmware
---

# Table of contents

1. TOC
{:toc}

# Introduction

The [BastardKB QMK repository](https://github.com/bastardkb/bastardkb-qmk) contains the firmware code and releases for the Bastard Keyboards Charybdis boards.

While that repository is used as primary source of truth for Bastard Keyboards firmwares as it contains the latest changes and improvements, the maintainers aim at upstreaming all those changes to the official [QMK repository](https://github.com/qmk/qmk_firmware).

> While the behavioural code is stored on the QMK repository, the keymaps are stored in our [QMK userspace](https://github.com/Bastardkb/qmk_userspace).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the behavioral code is stored on the QMK repository, the keymaps are stored in our [QMK userspace](https://github.com/Bastardkb/qmk_userspace).
```

This page details how to compile your own firmware. Building from source is useful to people who want to customize their keyboard and keymaps beyond what Via offers. This involves using a command-line interface, writing C code, and compiling this code into the final firmware file.

If that seems too complicated, you can also use one of the default releases, or VIA.

# Pre-requisites

## Working QMK environment

Make sure you have a functional QMK environment. See [QMK Docs](https://docs.qmk.fm/#/newbs) for details. At this point, **you don't need** to run `qmk setup`.

## BastardKb QMK fork

Clone the BKB QMK repository, using either github desktop or the command line, and switch to the `bkb-master` branch:

```shell
git clone https://github.com/bastardkb/bastardkb-qmk
cd bastardkb-qmk

> git checkout origin/bkb-master

Reviewer: ```suggestion
git checkout -b bkb-master origin/bkb-master
```
This creates a new local branch instead of checking out with a detached head. This will make modifications by the user and committing to their own repo simpler.

```

Now that you've cloned the repository, `cd` into it and set it as the default local QMK repository. You also need to do this if you had a previous, separate QMK installation.

```shell
qmk config user.qmk_home="$(realpath .)" 
```

{: .info }
If you have multiple QMK installations, you will need to manually set the qmk home path again to use the other ones.

## BastardKb userspace

While the QMK repository contains the logic behind the keyboards, the keymaps are in the userspace repository.

In a separate folder, clone the BKB QMK repository, using either github desktop or the command line:

```shell
git clone https://github.com/bastardkb/qmk_userspace
```

Next, `cd` into the repository and enable userspace:

```shell
cd qmk_userspace
qmk config user.overlay_dir="$(realpath .)"
```

## Github actions

// TODO screenshot enable actions workflows

> // TODO mroe details, screenshots

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// TODO more details, screenshots
```

Author: not relevant, as TODO's will be removed hopefully
I admire the dedication though

actions tab -- "I understand my workflows, go ahead and enable them"

1. In the GitHub Actions tab, enable workflows
2. Push your changes above to your forked GitHub repository
3. Look at the GitHub Actions for a new actions run
4. Wait for the actions run to complete
5. Inspect the Releases tab on your repository for the latest firmware build

# Compiling with console

> Once in the QMK Userspace repository, compiling a keymap works the same as normal:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once in the QMK userspace repository, compiling a keymap works the same as normal:
```

```shell
qmk compile -c -kb bastardkb/{keyboard} -km {keymap}
```

## `{keyboard}` argument

`{keyboard}` corresponds to the physical keyboard you are building the firmware for. It can be one of the following:

- `charybdis/4x6`: the 4x6+5 [Charybdis](https://github.com/bastardkb/charybdis/)
- `charybdis/3x5`: the 3x5+3 [Charybdis Nano](https://github.com/bastardkb/charybdis/)
- `charybdis/3x6`: the 3x6+3 [Charybdis Mini](https://github.com/bastardkb/charybdis/)
- `scylla`: the 4x6+5 [Scylla](https://github.com/Bastardkb/Scylla)
- `skeletyl`: the 3x5+3 [Skeletyl](https://github.com/Bastardkb/Skeletyl/)
- `tbkmini`: the 3x6+3 [TBK Mini](https://github.com/Bastardkb/TBK-Mini/)
- `dilemma/3x5_3`: the 3x5+3 [Dilemma](https://github.com/bastardkb/dilemma/)
- `dilemma/4x6_4`: the 4x6+4 [Dilemma Max](https://github.com/bastardkb/dilemma/)

## `{keymap}` argument

> All keyboards have a `default` keymap. Most also have a `via` keymap. The latter is already configured to work with [Via](https://usevia.app).

Reviewer: This should be `vendor` only from now on.

Author: done, updated. thanks

To build *any* keymap with Via support, simply add the following argument to the command line: `-e VIA_ENABLE=yes`, e.g.:

```shell
qmk compile -c -kb {keyboard} -km default -e VIA_ENABLE=yes
```

# Compiling with Github Actions

> If you clone the BastardKB Userspace repository, it is alredy configured to work with the BastardKB QMK fork.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you clone the BastardKB userspace repository, it is already configured to work with the BastardKB QMK fork.
```

Next, `cd` into the repository and enable userspace:

```shell
cd qmk_userspace
qmk config user.overlay_dir="$(realpath .)"
```

## Github actions {#actions-requirements}

If you want to use Github actions to compile your firmware (rather than the console), you will need to:

- fork the BastardKB QMK Userspace repository
- in the `Actions` tab, enable workflows

# Creating your keymap

If you want to create your own keymap, **we heavily recommend to create your own fork of the BastardKB QMK userspace.**

This way, you can:

- track changes
- use Github actions to compile your keymap
- (if relevant) contribute your keymap to the origin Bastard KB QMK Userspace

Create a separate folder in the relevant folder, eg:

```
keyboards/bastardkb/charybdis/4x6/keymaps/my-keymap/
```

Then, the easiest is to copy over an existing keymap (eg. `vendor`) over, and modify from there.

# Compiling with Github Actions

First, make sure you have went through the [Github actions requirements section above](#actions-requirements).

After cloning the BastardKB userspace repository, it is already configured to work with the BastardKB QMK fork - so no need for additional configuration on that side.

> If you created your own keymap, you will need to add it to the list of keympaps to be compiled in `qmk.json`, for example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you created your own keymap, you will need to add it to the list of keymaps to be compiled in `qmk.json`, for example:
```

```shell
qmk config user.overlay_dir="$(realpath .)"
```

## Compiling your firmware

Once in the QMK userspace repository, compiling a keymap works the same as normal:

```shell
qmk compile -c -kb bastardkb/{keyboard} -km {keymap}
```

### `{keyboard}` argument

`{keyboard}` corresponds to the physical keyboard you are building the firmware for. It can be one of the following:

- `charybdis/4x6`: the 4x6+5 [Charybdis](https://github.com/bastardkb/charybdis/)
- `charybdis/3x5`: the 3x5+3 [Charybdis Nano](https://github.com/bastardkb/charybdis/)
- `charybdis/3x6`: the 3x6+3 [Charybdis Mini](https://github.com/bastardkb/charybdis/)
- `scylla`: the 4x6+5 [Scylla](https://github.com/Bastardkb/Scylla)
- `skeletyl`: the 3x5+3 [Skeletyl](https://github.com/Bastardkb/Skeletyl/)
- `tbkmini`: the 3x6+3 [TBK Mini](https://github.com/Bastardkb/TBK-Mini/)
- `dilemma/3x5_3`: the 3x5+3 [Dilemma](https://github.com/bastardkb/dilemma/)
- `dilemma/4x6_4`: the 4x6+4 [Dilemma Max](https://github.com/bastardkb/dilemma/)

### `{keymap}` argument

All keyboards have a `vendor` keymap, which is the one officially supported and shipped with Bastard Keyboards.

> To build *any* keymap with Via support, simply add the following argument to the command line: `-e VIA_ENABLE=yes`, e.g.:

Reviewer: Should make clear that this is not necessary for `vendor` keymaps.
This also explodes it the keymap you're trying it on has more than 4 layers, as that's the default dynamic amount.

That (imho necessary) info bloats this aside to the point where I think it might better to just remove it. It won't be necessary at all because Dactyls used to need it as there was no `via` keymap. But with a `vendor` keymap under our control, that would have via enabled already.

# Introduction

> The [BastardKB QMK repository](https://github.com/bastardkb/bastardkb-qmk) contains the behavioural firmware code and releases for the Bastard Keyboards Charybdis boards.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [BastardKB QMK repository](https://github.com/bastardkb/bastardkb-qmk) contains the behavioral firmware code and releases for the Bastard Keyboards Charybdis boards.
```

The keymaps are stored in the [BastardKB QMK userspace repository][bkbus].

The QMK repository repository is used as primary source of truth for Bastard Keyboards firmwares and contains the latest changes and improvements.
The maintainers aim at upstreaming all those changes to the official [QMK repository](https://github.com/qmk/qmk_firmware).

This page details how to build your own firmware. 
Building from source is useful to people who want to customize their keyboard and keymaps beyond what Via offers. 
You will have to modify the keymap `C` code, and from there compile your firmware either using Github actions or the local command line.

> If that seems too complicated, you can also use one of the default releases, or VIA.

Reviewer: Doesn't one include the other? Perhaps "you can also use one of the defalult releases using via".

"default releases" should also link to the releases page.

Author: added release link. not sure what you mean with the other

Reviewer: See suggestion below

# Pre-requisites

> ## BastardKb userspace

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## BastardKB userspace
```

Building from source is useful to people who want to customize their keyboard and keymaps beyond what Via offers. 
You will have to modify the keymap `C` code, and from there compile your firmware either using Github actions or the local command line.

> If that seems too complicated, you can also use one of the [default releases](https://github.com/Bastardkb/bastardkb-qmk/releases/latest), or VIA.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If that seems too complicated, you can also use one of the [release firmware](https://github.com/Bastardkb/bastardkb-qmk/releases/latest) builds.
```

{: .info }
If you have multiple QMK installations, you will need to manually set the qmk home path again to use the other ones.

That's all you needed to do with the QMK repository.

> From here on, **we will only focus on the Userspace repository.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From here on, **we will only focus on the userspace repository.**
```

Create a separate folder in the relevant folder, eg:

```
keyboards/bastardkb/charybdis/4x6/keymaps/my-keymap/
```

Then, the easiest is to copy over an existing keymap (eg. `vendor`) over, and modify from there.

# Compiling with Github Actions

First, make sure you have went through the [Github actions requirements section above](#actions-requirements).

After cloning the BastardKB userspace repository, it is already configured to work with the BastardKB QMK fork - so no need for additional configuration on that side.

If you created your own keymap, you will need to add it to the list of keympaps to be compiled in `qmk.json`, for example:

```shell
{
    "userspace_version": "1.0",
    "build_targets": [
        ["bastardkb/charybdis/4x6", "my-keymap"]
    ]
}
```

We also recommend deleting the other keymaps if you don't use them, as it'll make the action run faster.

Then,

1. Push your changes above to your forked GitHub repository
1. Look at the GitHub Actions for a new actions run
1. Wait for the actions run to complete
1. Inspect the Releases tab on your repository for the latest firmware build

> # Compiling with console

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Compiling locally
```

## Github actions {#actions-requirements}

> If you want to use Github actions to compile your firmware (rather than the console), you will need to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to use Github actions to compile your firmware (rather than doing it locally in the console), you will need to:
```
Not thrilled with this wording, but the differentiation should make clear that the alternative to GH actions is *local* compilation.

1. Inspect the Releases tab on your repository for the latest firmware build

# Compiling your firmware using the local command line

You can also compile your firmware through your local command line. This requires you to be familiar with the console, and doing some additional configuration.

## Pre-requisites

### Working QMK environment

Make sure you have a functional QMK environment. See [QMK Docs](https://docs.qmk.fm/#/newbs) for details. At this point, **you don't need** to run `qmk setup`.

> ### BastardKb QMK fork

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### BastardKB QMK fork
```
